Alright, let's break down congenital heart
diseases in a way
that actually makes clinical sense at the
bedside.
These conditions, like PDA, ASD,
VSD, Tetralogy of Fallot, Transposition of
the Great Arteries, and Hypoplastic Left
Heart Syndrome aren't just
structural problems, they're physiology
problems that directly impact oxygenation,
ventilation, and perfusion.
The key concept you need to anchor to is
shunting.
Blood is either moving left or right,
meaning oxygenated blood
is recirculating back to the lungs, or
right-to-left,
meaning deoxygenated blood is bypassing
the lungs and entering systemic circulation.
That difference determines whether the
patient is primarily dealing with pulmonary overcirculation or systemic
hypoxemia.
In left-to-right shunts like PDA, ASD,
and VSD, you'll see increased pulmonary
blood flow.
These patients often present with
tachypnea, mild hypoxemia,
and signs of heart failure over time.
Your role as an RT is recognizing
increased work of breathing and supporting oxygenation
while monitoring for pulmonary edema.
Right-to-left shunts, like Tetralogy of
Fallot,
cause cyanosis because blood bypasses the
You may see TET spells,
where oxygen saturation suddenly drops.
Here, oxygen alone may not fully correct
hypoxemia because the
issue isn't ventilation, it's circulation.
Then you have critical defects like
transposition of the great arteries and hypoplastic left
heart syndrome.
These are ductal-dependent lesions.
Without a connection like the ductus
arteriosus, oxygenated and deoxygenated
blood can't mix effectively.
That's why prostaglandin E1 is often used
to keep that duct open and maintain
life-sustaining circulation.
From a board prep perspective, always ask,
is this a mixing problem, a flow problem,
or a pressure problem?
And clinically, your focus is oxygenation,
work of breathing, and recognizing when
standard oxygen therapy won't
fix the issue.
Red flags include persistent cyanosis
despite oxygen, worsening respiratory distress,
poor feeding in infants, and signs of
shock.
These patients can decompensate quickly.
As a respiratory therapist, you are not
just managing oxygen,
you are interpreting physiology in real
time.
Understanding the type of defect helps you
anticipate what the patient needs next and
when escalation is critical.
That's how you move from memorization to
clinical decision making.